hi I'm Kathleen Samms and today I'm
going to show you how to work
provisional cast-on I've got a couple of
different methods here that you can try
provisional cast-on is many times used
if you want to add a collar to your
piece or maybe you want to scene things
together and this is a great way to
graph them or maybe you're making a
scarf or something where you have two
pieces wanting to go in the same
direction and this is a great way to
work live stitches later so what we're
going to do is start with a slip stitch
or a slip knot on our needle and this is
our working yarn and this is my favorite
way of working it so we're going to
start off with a circular needle and
instead of using waste yarn I like to
use the circular needle that way I have
it the stitches already on the needle
ready to go when when I'm ready to start
the next section so we're just going to
wrap around and you see how I've done
that so here we go we've got it started
let me get this over here so we're going
to go over under up through there over
and there we're making our stitches so
follow me go get your equipment and set
and follow and watch me do this and
you're adding two stitches as you're
completing this over under over and so
you can see that this really does work
here we have a piece where I've knit and
this is the direction the knitting and
here I have my live stitches on my
circular needles ready to go so you have
to do is just pick up your yarn and
start in another way of working a
provisional cast on is to take what we
call a scrap yarn or a waste yarn which
would be some different color than what
you're actually using and I would use
the same weight yarn as what the product
what you're actually working with so
again this time we're going to start
with a chain and I've just
ten chains make more chains than what
stitches actually are called for in the
pattern that way you've got a few
stitches on the end on each end so you
can pull this out later and what I like
to do is if you look at this you can see
the chains flip it over and you see
there's bumps going across here and this
is where I place the stitches so I'll
leave a few chains empty that way that
gives me like my little ripcord that I
can pull at the end and we're going to
insert our needle and all you're going
to do is go in there look at this and
you just pick these up and you're
pulling them through
see there
and you just place these all on your
needle as you're going across here we
have a piece where I've actually done
your swatch to show you now here you can
see this is the chain we've come in and
we've picked up and we've knit our
stitches so what you're going to do now
is come in pull this out and this is
like I say have you ever purchased like
a bag of dog food and had that little
zip thing on the top of it well that's
what this is like so you pull it very
carefully and you may want to have your
needle handy so you can pull your
stitches I'm leaving this so you can
actually see the live stitches and like
I say you'd be very very careful when
you pull this out there we go see here
there's our live stitches so all we have
to do come in insert our needle and pick
up those live stitches and continue on
there is also another method of doing a
provisional cast on with a waste yarn
and we're going to start this time by
doing a slip knot with both of them held
together so you make a slip slide that
on there keep your working yarn so the
yarn that you're actually using in your
project will be the top yarn your waste
yarn will be the bottom yarn and you're
going to hold it like you would if
you're doing a long tail cast on you're
going to come over the top underneath
around and wrap it it's just like I was
showing you how to do it when we did the
adding for the circular needle it's the
same motion so you can either use this
method or the the circular needle which
is what I like because that way the
needles are already there and I don't
have to worry about pulling this out in
the end see how we're doing this over
under up through over around and what
it's doing is its twisting and you see
you're scrap yarn there when you get
your knitted piece completed these
little loops here when you pull this out
they'll make little loops like it did on
the other piece and that's where you
insert your needle that's all there is
to provisional cast-on